projects/rhun/paper/README.md, before:

# RHUN Paper Sources (Canonical)

This directory is the source of truth for RHUN papers in this repository.
Edit `.tex` and `.bib` files here first.

After edits, publish with:

```bash
./scripts/publish_papers_from_sources.sh
```

That command rebuilds PDFs, syncs the mirror at `projects/rhun/paper/`, and refreshes
the top-level publication PDFs in `papers/`.

## Canonical files
- `finite_absorbing_states.tex` -> `main.tex`
- `finite_absorbing_states.pdf` -> `main.pdf`
- `streaming_oscillation_traps_draft.tex` -> `streaming_draft.tex`
- `streaming_oscillation_traps_draft.pdf` -> `streaming_draft.pdf`
- `context_algebra_endogenous_semantics_draft.tex` -> `context_algebra_draft.tex`
- `context_algebra_endogenous_semantics_draft.pdf` -> `context_algebra_draft.pdf`

## Figure scripts
- `generate_figures.py` (finite-paper figures)
- `generate_streaming_figures.py` (streaming-paper figures)

## Figure directories
- `figures/` (finite)
- `figures/streaming/` (streaming)

## Interactive explainer
- `interactive_paper_explainer.html`
  - Self-contained interactive guide for `main.pdf` and `streaming_draft.pdf`
  - Includes concept map, finite `jdev` vs `k` simulator, failure-class explorer, algorithm hierarchy comparison, and streaming patience/trap playground

Commit message:

Reviewer-readiness cleanup: portable paths, status pointers, licensing
- Replace all hardcoded /Users/jackg paths with portable alternatives
- Rewrite reproducibility-checklist.md with portable commands
- Fix broken notebook paths in artifact-index.md and release/README.md
- Point all docs to current_status.md as canonical test status
- Add root LICENSE (proprietary with Lorien MIT exception)
- Pin requirements.txt upper bounds, add requirements-full.txt
- Mark arXiv citation placeholders as Forthcoming
- Remove 7 backward-compat wrapper stubs (use scripts/ directly)
- Remove unused imports in src/
- Add .gitattributes for LFS awareness
- Extract shared _same_context() test helper
- Fix by_topic/ README symlink claims
- Clean adapter_config.json of absolute paths

Note: release/SHA256SUMS.txt may need recomputing after
adapter_config.json change.

projects/rhun/paper/README.md, after:

# RHUN Paper Sources (Canonical)

This directory is the source of truth for RHUN papers in this repository.
Edit `.tex` and `.bib` files here first.
Compiled publication PDFs are tracked in `papers/` at repo root.

After edits, publish with:

```bash
./scripts/publish_papers_from_sources.sh
```

That command rebuilds PDFs, syncs the mirror at `projects/rhun/paper/`, and refreshes
the top-level publication PDFs in `papers/`.

## Canonical files
- `finite_absorbing_states.tex` -> `main.tex`
- `streaming_oscillation_traps_draft.tex` -> `streaming_draft.tex`
- `context_algebra_endogenous_semantics_draft.tex` -> `context_algebra_draft.tex`

## Figure scripts
- `generate_figures.py` (finite-paper figures)
- `generate_streaming_figures.py` (streaming-paper figures)

## Figure directories
- `figures/` (finite)
- `figures/streaming/` (streaming)

## Interactive explainer
- `interactive_paper_explainer.html`
  - Self-contained interactive guide for `main.pdf` and `streaming_draft.pdf`
  - Includes concept map, finite `jdev` vs `k` simulator, failure-class explorer, algorithm hierarchy comparison, and streaming patience/trap playground
